# Assignment 1: Annotated Bibliography

Jason Deng

DATA 150

23 February, 2020

### Problem Statement 

Vector-borne illnesses are difficult and nasty to combat due to the inherent nature of the disease. Vector-borne viruses and parasites like dengue and malaria, respectively, disproportionately plague many lower-middle income countries that are still developing, who are often overwhelmed and unable to successfully combat the illness. Additionally, vector-borne illnesses like malaria are also influenced by a wealth of other factors, including rainfall, temperature, or changes in agricultural practices. Illnesses like malaria and dengue are especially problematic in Southeast Asia, as climates are typically tropical and wet and carriers like mosquitos thrive in such conditions. Many Southeast Asian countries also rely heavily on agriculture and farming in rural villages. Thus, data science technologies will be crucial as it allows us to connect the multitude of factors impacting malaria and other vector-borne illnesses in southeast asia, which will be discussed below. 

### Annotations

#### 1. Jeefoo, P., Tripathi, N. K., & Souris, M. (2010). Spatio-Temporal Diffusion Pattern and Hotspot Detection of Dengue in Chachoengsao Province, Thailand. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 8(1), 51–74. doi: 10.3390/ijerph8010051

In this journal, Jeefoo et al seeked to examine diffusion patterns and hotspot identification for reported dengue cases. Like malaria, dengue is a vector-borne illness that is spread by mosquitoes. However, it is more contagious due to the fact that dengue can be spread through human interactions, unlike malaria. As such, it has continued to infect more and upward trends in incidence for the past 50 years. Because dengue primarily exists in warm, tropical countries, Thailand has shown to be one of the more infected countries. In 2008, the total numbers of reported cases of dengue infections in Thailand were 43,911, with 46 deaths nationwide.

Part of the problems of tracking dengue in Thailand are identifying the many risk factors. Such include climate factors like rainfall, temperature, and humidity along with behavior of human population movement. The researchers approach this problem while trying to track dengue by using GIS technologies and spatial analysis. These tools allow better identification of “critical areas” and better implement the various variables that relate to dengue’s dynamics.

Jeefoo et al obtained dengue epidemiology data from the Chachoengsao Provincial Public Health Office (CPPHO) for years 1997-2007. Chachoengsao province in Thailand had the second highest mortality rate of dengue, and was selected because of such disease incidence along with the lifestyle that depends on farming and the rainy season. Village data was obtained from the Department of Provincial Administration, and climate data was obtained from Thai Meteorological Department. Using the data, the researchers then used various softwares (SavGIS, ArcGIS,GeoDa,SatScan) that allowed them to generate various mappings and graphs. When mapping, the researchers had to account for various statistical variability. For example, villages with a small number of inhabitants are more subject to vary between years than villages with high numbers of inhabitants. An empirical Bayes smoothing method was developed, in which rates were smoothed and thus stabilized by borrowing strength from other spatial units. The researchers used GIS technology to display temporal data, which was evaluated over a span of 10 years, from 1997 to 2007. 

The researchers drew many valuable pieces conclusions from the analysis. From 1997 to 2007, dengue cases always increase during the rainy season when rainfall is high. Additionally, the concentration of reported dengue cases is situated mainly towards the western part of Chachoengsao province. Hotspots for dengue cases were showcased in a Moran scatter plot matrix and a LISA cluster map of dengue fever mortality rate. 

Thanks to recent advances in GIS technology, Jeefoo et al were able to better see and track dengue cases in Chachoengsao province. Dengue spatio-temporal diffusion patterns and hotspot detection are crucial in tracking and seeing patterns in dengue cases. This means better healthcare aid can be given to the areas that need it, and also allow people to better predict when dengue cases will be rising (during the rainy season). Public health officers can save time and costs by being able to better plan on controlling dengue. 

#### 2. Paul, M. C., Goutard, F. L., Roulleau, F., Holl, D., Thanapongtharm, W., Roger, F. L., & Tran, A. (2016). Quantitative assessment of a spatial multicriteria model for highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 in Thailand, and application in Cambodia. Scientific reports, 6, 31096. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep31096

The Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza H5N1 (HPAI) virus is now considered “endemic” in several Asian countries. HPAI H5N1 is spread through poultry, which many lower-middle income countries in Southeast Asia raise in small backyard farms, with close proximity to other livestock and people. Thus, along with little to nonexistent biosecurity measures in place and with unreliable and delayed reports of outbreaks, much of the Cambodian population (73% in total who depend exclusively on livestock and agriculture) are at extreme risk every day. These factors all lead to various outbreaks, and HPAI H5N1 is considered an epidemic in the poultry population of Cambodia. 

These researches call for a better mapping of poultry / avian densities in the form of “risk maps”. Current methods of disease management and control of the government are unreliable due to their policy of simply killing off mass amounts of poultry believed to be infected without proper compensation for farmers. This leads to farmers attempting to micromanage the outbreak by attempting to disinfect their local area or sell off the supposedly infected poultry to other villages to not lose profit. This relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development that when there is a lack of freedoms, in this case freedom of market as the government is forcing the citizens to do something, poverty will prevail and overall richness of life will decrease. The freedom of market is what Sen considers one of the instrumental freedoms, and necessary for advancements in other freedoms. 

Due to the fact that the relatively weak healthcare system in Cambodia lacks reliable disease data, the researchers utilize “knowledge-driven modeling methods”, including spatial multicriteria decision analysis (MCDA) instead. The density of avian livestock and animals (free-grazing ducks, farm ducks, and backyard chickens) were calculated at the third-level administrative subdivision using a census by the National Veterinary Research Institute  in Cambodia from 2010 and the Department of Livestock Development in Thailand from 2005. Using ArcGIS and R (programming language for statistical analysis), this data was then supplemented with “risk factors”. Such factors included proportion of surface covered with rice fields and open water with vector maps, density of human populations, proximity to cities, and mean altitudes. These predictors were then transformed into raster layers of pixel size 90m x 90m. Each risk factor was then assigned a weight, determined through a suitability index equation and sensitivity analysis. 

The resultant maps and graphs displayed critical information about the suitability for occurrence of HPAI H5N1 in domestic poultry. Various areas (mostly rural) can be seen accounting for the higher densities of poultry. Such mapping is important for the control and combat of future HPAI H5N1 outbreaks as the maps allow for better analysis for areas at risk and where possible humanitarian aid and efforts should be directed to.

#### 3. Cox, J., Sovannaroth, S., Dy Soley, L., Ngor, P., Mellor, S., & Roca-Feltrer, A. (2014). Novel approaches to risk stratification to support malaria elimination: an example from Cambodia. Malaria journal, 13, 371. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2875-13-371

Part of the innovative greatness map-making technologies like GIS systems is the ability to create specialized alternatives. In Map-making On a Budget, Perkel mentions a team of researchers in Antarctica created a free and open-source Antarctic-mapping resource called “Quantarctica”. Such an idea is applied to the study and mapping of malaria: the Malaria Information System (MIS) was developed to “generate” prompt data on temporal and spatial variations in malaria cases reported through public health facilities and village malaria workers (VMWs).

Cox and his team of researchers seeked to test the feasibility of MIS as a stronger malaria surveillance system. Currently in Cambodia, the fight against malaria has gone past the control phase and enters the elimination phase. Because of such, there aren’t as many reported cases as before and hotspots for malaria begin to shrink down to sub-district / village level, and current “decision support systems” are becoming more and more outdated. Since 2004, Cambodia has been surveilling malaria through the framework of the Health Management Information System (HMIS), but the HMIS operates on data from cases in government health facilities, which fails to capture the entire situation, such as malaria in villages. 

In contrast, MIS seeks to answer this issue by not only taking in data from public healthcare facilities but also data from VMWs. The VMW network is deployed in villages across almost all of the provinces except for Kampong Chhnang and Kampong Cham. VMWs then carry out quick tests on individuals suspected of malaria before reporting their results as positive or negative. Cox et al then used STATA (v.12) and ArcGIS (v10.1) for MIS data assessment and statistical analysis. The results showed an accurate report of malaria cases. After matching MIS village data with existing census population data, the researchers could see that, for example in 2011, 36.2 percent of villages had no malaria cases and a majority (65.4%) has fewer than five cases per thousand population. The highest incidence rates could be traced into the northern and eastern parts of Cambodia, like Ratanakiri, Stung Treng, Mondulkiri, Preah Vihear and Kratie, along with Koh Kong in the west. 

The importance of the MIS is it allows health officials and researchers to better track malaria in countries that need to get the smaller picture. With VMW data along with the already existing health facility data, the stratification of malaria was a lot more timely, routine, and feasible (thanks to high reporting rates than the existing HMIS in Cambodia. However, there are still limitations. Cox et al mention that this system depends heavily on the collaboration on reporting completeness and timeliness. Reporting lag will leave gaps in data and thus decrease the reliability of the MIS. Despite this, it is hopeful that the MIS will be able to replace currently outdated systems in Cambodia and provide contemporary analysis of malaria to develop strategies for malaria elimination not only for Cambodia as well as many other inflicted nations. 

#### 4. Khilji, S. U. S., Rudge, J. W., Drake, T., Chavez, I., Borin, K., Touch, S., & Coker, R. (2013). Distribution of selected healthcare resources for influenza pandemic response in Cambodia. International Journal for Equity in Health, 12(1), 82. doi: 10.1186/1475-9276-12-82

Being able to timely distribute health resources to the populations that need it is crucial for fighting and controlling outbreaks. Khilji et al seek to answer this by collecting survey data on available healthcare resources (inpatient beds, nurses, doctors, ventilators, medicine) necessary for treating severe influenza. The researchers want to address the situation that affects many developing countries, and that is the burden of weaker health systems compared to high-income countries. Many lower-middle income countries have poor populations that often have decreased access to healthcare. Specifically, in Cambodia, the poorer rural areas where villages are typically have harder access to developed roads that will lead towards an established healthcare center. 

The researchers gathered data on the inventory of many healthcare sites. Itemized healthcare resources were recorded and quantified through various surveys the researchers developed, and were sent to all government-supported hospitals (n=185) and District Health Offices (n=77). Any missing or incomplete responses were extrapolated with linear prediction models using the software STATA (v.11), a statistical and data science software. Then, after all the data was collected, resource densities were leveled and mapped under several labels like “relatively undersupplied”, “relatively oversupplied”, “multiple under-supply”, “resource mismatch”, or “multiple oversupply”. GIS analysis was done using ESRI ArcGIS 9.0 and OpenGeoDA 1.0.1 to determine the clustering or dispersion of health resources across provinces and Operational Districts. Such clustering and dispersion was defined with Moran’s Index to measure spatial autocorrelation. 

The results showed that inpatient beds, doctors, and nurses were heavily concentrated around Phnom Penh province (the capital) and Tonle Sap, while central parts of Cambodia had the lowest concentration. The researchers were also able to determine low-low, high-low, low-high, and high-high areas. Low-low areas are defined as areas with areas with low resource density surrounded by areas with low resources, and high-high clusters are areas with high resource per capita surrounded by areas with high per capita, and so on. 

This data is crucial when considering pandemic influenza response in Cambodia. Inpatient beds can be redistributed into infected areas with low resources quickly thanks to the analysis that located which provinces have low resources. This relates to Amartya Sen’s definition of human development in that every person has personal freedoms. Such freedom includes the right to adequate healthcare, which should be provided when the situation calls for it. Being able to provide doctors and inpatient beds when needed are part of the substantive freedoms people deserve, which thus will allow for a nation to develop better. 

#### 5. Lai, S., Sun, J., Ruktanonchai, N. W., Zhou, S., Yu, J., Routledge, I., … Li, Z. (2019). Changing epidemiology and challenges of malaria in China towards elimination. Malaria Journal, 18(1). doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2736-8

While China isn’t a southeast asian country, it shares borders with a few of them, including Vietnam, Laos, and Myanmar. Thus, it is important to include China in epidemiology and tracking vector borne illnesses, especially as urbanization rapidly increases in China in addition to oversea travels. In this journal, researchers Lai et al not only track malaria domestically, but also analyze how malaria is “imported” into China and the origin of such. 

The researchers gather data of individual malaria cases from the Malaria Enhanced Surveillance Information System (MESIS) in China. They grouped the data by checking if a specific case had travelled to another foreign malaria-endemic area within a month before the illness started, as well as potential location of infection. Otherwise, the researchers assumed that the malaria case was domestic. The researchers used the statistical software R and ArcGIS 10.3 for data collation and analysis, and Gephi 0.91 was used to detect the communities of importation networks. To display a heatmap of where most foreign malaria cases came from, the researchers took foreign cases of malaria from the MESIS and compiled a density surface with spatial resolution 0.083333 decimal degrees per pixel before overlaying it with polygons of the foreign countries. The results [Figure 6] showed that the foreign countries with most malaria cases in China were exactly in Southeast, with Myanmar, Thailand, and Laos being highest. 

This is crucial when considering malaria control and elimination. A nation can do as much as it can domestically, but there will be international trade and travel that will have a noticeable impact. The conclusions Lai et al showed allows Chinese government officials to better plan against malaria outbreaks and infections. Controls / screenings for immigration or travel from inflicted areas is just one of the things that can be done. Additionally, China can lend aid to the Southeast Asian countries to ensure the countries of origin are also cured. 


