# Response to Joshua Blumenstock's article 

Jason Deng

## Joshua Blumenstock states that a humbler data science could transform international development while also limiting the number of alleged silver bullets that have missed their mark in recent years. Describe the promise, pitfalls and ways forward Blumenstock uses as the foundation for his thesis.

Phones are becoming more and more integral in our modern society. With 95% of the global population having access to mobile-phone coverage, and with a rising number of people with phones, many organizations and people around the world are using phone data to better approach humanitarian problms and improve data collection. Blumenstock mentions how phone data allows researches to better understand economic relations between different groups of people. Researches noticed that wealthier people tended to make more international calls and successfully repay their debts. Algorithms can be developed from currently existing ones (like the ones Google and Facebook use to target advertisements) to match resources to the impoverished. This practice can allow researches to figure out which places are most affected by natural disasters, and thus allowing better international response and aid during a sudden crisis. Using phone data is so efficient in fact, that it is possible within a few years to be able to track individuals each minute during a natural disaster. 

Blumemstock mentions that there are at least 4 pitfalls with this method of data collection. Firstly, the data collected may harm vulnerable people instead. Blumenstock gives the example of digital credit and loans from Kenya in 2012. People were assessed of their credit score by factors such as history of phone use. As a result, many loans were given out to quite a few people. However, this proved to be an ineffective way of data collecting to dish out credit scores as many people were misinformed of the interest rates of such. As a result, it is unknown whether or not these loans helped people at all. Another pitfall is the lack of validation. While surveys and door-to-door interviews are inefficient and imperfect, they have been done over a span of decades, and thus provides a background and foundation on which these very methods can be examined and analyzed. However, the new methods are not very well known, and their limitations are not well documented. For example, the case where wealthier people made more international phone calls correlated more strongly in Rwanda than Afghanistan. Thus, patterns can not be generalized from inconsistent results. Sometimes, phone calls are subject to change and may not be reliable. The example Blumenstock gives is how while wealthy people may make more international calls, the pattern could shift during the "pilgramage months", when many people from all backgrounds are traveling. This leads to another pitfall that Blumenstock brings up, which is how phone data can be biased. To own a phone, you will probably need many privileged necessities, like electricity, literacy, and connectivity. This excludes many people in developing countries.  

In order to better improve the reliability and trustworthyness of using mobile phones for big data, the private sector needs to come in play with governments and researchers. Letting a nation have all the power and control with big data leads to situations like China where people are being judged for their credit score, and thus may lead to them not being able to access some public facilites. But letting individual companies control big data leads to them using them for monetary gain, which is intrinsic human nature. A collaboration allows fair play and researches all around the world to work together in solving emerging challenges. 

## How do you respond to these ideas regarding “good intent”, “transparency” and the difficult “balancing act” when considering the intersection of human development with data science?

I agree with Anna in that good intent is not enough when it comes to human development. Good intent is extremely vague and could be twisted to justify actions with ill-intentions. What is needed is transparency, which allows researches and people alike to better understand the intersection of human development with data science. 

In context of the Blumenstock article, the use of mobile phone data to better record human development is still relatively new. Such pitfalls mentioned can easily be addressed in the future. While infractions on privacy is a main issue with such data collection, things like the Supreme Court or some global organization will make sure to regulate such activities, so that big data will not be abused for economic or other ill-intentioned gains. 
