# Response to Selim Jahan's and Hans Rosling's 


Are we smarter than Chimpanzees? Obviously, the intuitive answer should be yes. But such intuition may be the exact reason why chimpanzees may perform better in a test than humans. More specifically, Hans Rosling conducted a survey for students and professors at a university as well as chimpanzees, asking which country between 2 given had the higher child mortality rate. The chimpanzees actually performed better than both the students and the professors, who were supposed to be experts! This was due to the fact that chimpanzees had no bias when selecting to two countries (represented as bananas), and thus got half right. It is this bias that Rosling challenges, and proceeds to elaborate on in his TED talk. Hans Rosling claims that "tremendous social change...often precedes economic change”. Through a visual presentation of how various countries have improved since 1960, it can be seen that western nations like the USA and many European countries continued to have small improvements to their already great standards of living and economy (judged by GDP per capita and child survival rate), but many developing third world countries rapidly improved as well, to the point where they are close, if not on track, to the developed western nations. When talking about how social change came before economic change, one big example Rosling has is with China. First, Mao Zedong brought healthcare, then Deng Xiaoping brought the "money". It was with this that China exploded into mainstream success. Rosling also warned against averaging some countries. If you look at the data of countries as a single point, you will fail to get the full picture. The top 20% of Ugandan's overlap with the lowest 20% or so for South Africa, while the lowest 20% of Uganda trails way behind. How can humanitarian aid be properly distributed equally between the top 20% and lowest 20% if they are lumped together? In order to best aid human development, averaging must be avoided. Thus, this requires a new way of looking at human development. In Selim Jahan's podcast "What is Human Development", Jahan challenges the idea that human development should be focusing on economic growth. Instead, it should be "of the people, by the people, and for the people". As nations continue to improve economically and increase GDP, the focus should be turned more into improving daily human life. By focusing not only economically but socially and politcally, human development can reach its max potential and improve standard of living. Part of this change from from the HDI, which measures how successful and developed societies are by not just considering GDP, but health and healthcare facilities, education, standard of living, etc. 

The ideas of Rosling and Jahan call of a change in the way we view human development. Rosling challenges the idea the biased "us vs them" mentality the western populace has. People believe that many countries in the developing third-world, which they label as anything not western, is not socially and as economically developed at all compared to them. However, such statement can be proven wrong given the trends identified by the graph Rosling presented. Many countries have been on track to match the western countries, and projected growth shows that it will be attained in the future. In order to better prepare for such, human development needs a new outlook. The focus on economic development will need to lessen and be moved to political and social development. The examples Rosling gives like China (with Maozedong's social reform and Deng Xiaopings economic reform) exemplify that social change is a precursor to economic change in rapidly developing nations, which highlights Jahan's case for a renewed view of human development. Ultimately, what is possibly limiting the potential of our nations is our current biased viewpoint of human development. Many institutions like healthcare facilties, hospitals, schools, buildings, can be better allocated and planned with the focus on social and political development before economic growth. 
