## Remote Essay #2

Jason Deng

4/21/2020

### How  did  the  transformation  of  the  City  of  God  provide  evidence for how social networks were central to Rio de Janeiro’s urbanization during the 60s, 70s & 80s?

In a bustling city of crime, passion, and violence, known as Rio de Janeiro, each citizen living there goes about approaching their own way of life. Like an ant colony where each ant has a sense of unconscious purpose, a large city of people each separately has their own goals and ambitions, but comes together to define a larger system that is unique yet predictable in its own way. West mentions how while every city has its “ups” with social and technological development, there exists a negative side as well, and the City of God perfectly encapsulates that idea. In the film Cidade de Deus, the transformation of the City of God provided evidence for how social networks were central to Rio de Janeiro’s urbanization during the 60s, 70s & 80s. This is visualized through the depictions of the relationships between the city’s hoodlums, civilians, police, press, etc, the universal dynamic of scale present between the Tender Trio and Lil Ze’s organized gang, and the implications of Tobler’s First Law of Geography as seen through the lives of the hoodlums. 

Right away at the start of the movie, our narrator Rocket tells the audience exactly how it is at the slums. Rocket explains how the favela is the way it is because the rich and powerful at the higher levels of government did not care about them. The social network that exists between the government and the favela is non-existent; what exists is the network between the city and the gangs. When Rocket was still a boy, there existed a gang called the Tender Trio, with Shaggy, Goose, Clipper as the main members. By robbing gas trucks that drive through the town and sharing the money with the town residents in a Robin Hood-esque style, the town shields and provides a haven for the Tender Trio from the police. This basic relation introduced at the start of the film shows the foundation for how Rio de Janeiro will evolve; around the gangs that provide for them rather than the government. Part of West’s descriptions of characteristics of cities include the “negative” side, or this case, crime. In a city that “teemed with addicts” according to Rocket, the citizens were willing to incorporate and tolerate drug dealers and gang members. When we move onto Lil Ze’s operation, which runs at a larger scale than the Tender Trio’s, we get a better picture on how the city revolves around Lil Ze. From the police accepting bribes to store owners seeking Lil Ze’s protection, the city evolves and develops around the present reality of corruption and organized crime due the intrinsic need of the city. Lil Ze’s gang and drug dealing can not be used single-handedly to describe how Rio de Janeiro worked and evolved, but rather every single complex system in total, from the press to the police. 

There is a clear distinction in the movie, which separates two timelines, or eras. The first is when Rocket is a young boy, and the Tender Trio was the biggest gang in the town. Later is when Lil Dice turns into Lil Ze, a ruthless kingpin of the drug dealing business. It is through this transition where we can see examples of scale. On the smaller side, we have the Tender Trio and their interactions with police and the townspeople. Because the scale is much smaller, the relationships are much more clear. The Trio performs crime and shares money with the townspeople, the townspeople shield them from the police. When the police are trying to eliminate the trio, they are relatively successful in the end; the trio is abandoned, Shaggy and Goose are dead. The smaller scale of the town's social network allows for a better picture on how things work and the results are more pronounced. On the other hand, scaling upwards to Lil Ze’s massive drug ring that encapsulated large parts of the city, the bigger picture becomes more blurry. Tracking down Lil Ze and rival drug dealers like Carrot becomes a lot more difficult. There are so many more agents and factors that come into play: their clients, the goons in their gang, etc. The police are also bribed and turn a blind eye along with the city. As the city plunges into war, with children dying left and right, it takes more than a year for it to be semi-resolved after Lil Ze and Carrot are captured at a battle. Even then, Lil Ze almost makes it out as he bribes the police for his release, despite the multiple articles and newspaper appearances giving Lil Ze notoriety. In essence, the “biology” of the system of Lil Ze’s era is much more complex than it was with the Tender Trio.

Tobler’s First Law of Geography states that “everything is related  to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things.” This law is especially present in the movie, being one of the main themes. The idea is the inescapability of poverty and violence. When the Tender Trio’s invasion of the motel turns sour, with police crawling their town searching for them, they should’ve turned away from the life of crime. However, as Shaggy’s SO mentioned in the movie, a hoodlum stays a hoodlum. Shaggy tries his best to leave his life of crime by hijacking a car, but in the end he still gets killed as the car is unable to start without a push, which made him open to gunshots from the police. When Goose was trying to escape from town as well after being caught sleeping with someone else’s wife, he was shot by Lil Dice. Even Benny, who was seen as the “good” hood in a city of crime, trying to escape the hoodlum life with Angelica, was shot dead in a party. The film makes the inescapability of poverty and violence clear throughout these hoodlums. 

Every city is its own complex adaptive system. The City of God showed this throughout the examples of the Tender Trio and Lil Ze and their relationships and interactions with the city. While each one (the Tender Trio and Lil Ze parts) behaved and acted differently, they were both predictable in the end. West mentions how all companies eventually will die, as the entropy is not unlimited. However, while the “companies” and biological individuals may die, the city will continue to live on and survive. 
